---
title: "Carrigogunnell Castle"
address: " Tourist Information Office, Limerick, Co. Limerick"
tel: "+353 (0)61 31 7522"
county: "Limerick"
category: "Castles"
type: "Content"
lat: "52.64200210571289"
lng: "-8.739931106567383"
images: ["carrigogunnell-castle-1.jpg","500","367","carrigogunnell-castle-2.jpg","500","375","carrigogunnell-castle-3.jpg","333","500","carrigogunnell-castle-4.jpg","307","230","carrigogunnell-castle-6.jpg","500","335"]
excerpt: "Located 4 miles away from Mungret to the west, Carrigogunnell Castle is a medieval Irish fortification in county Limerick. Standing on the banks of Ri..."
---
<p>Located 4 miles away from Mungret to the west, Carrigogunnell Castle is a medieval Irish fortification in county Limerick. Standing on the banks of River Shannon, this fortress is a striking landmark which is situated on a volcanic crag, 2 miles away in the north of Clarina Village. This spectacular ruin of Carrigogunnell Castle has an imposing structure with two towers, which date back to 15th and 16th century. This majestic manor provides evidences of the excellent use of natural defences in the era. </p>  
    <p>It is believed that the Norman William de Burgo was the original owner of the castle and first erected it in Limerick. After his marriage into the O'Briens, who were the Kings of Munster, the estate came under the authority of the Earls of Kildare. However, in 1536, O'Brien's regained the authority of the estate. In 1584, Brien Dubh O'Brien was re-granted the possession of the castle after he invaded it and succeeded from Cromwellian forfeitures. From 1642 to 1648, the possession of this majestic landmark was under the Confederates.</p>  
    <p>Carrigogunnell Castle was the culmination point of various historical occurrences, which have influenced the history of this castle. The castle was taken over, swapped ownership, defended, attacked and plundered many times over its long history. These occurrences finally came to an end during the second siege of Limerick in 1691, when this castle was finally destroyed beyond repair by Williamite forces. This demolition occurred without any signs of battle or invasion. 150 men from the garrison invaded the castle and blew it apart using a large amount of gun powder; thus, preventing it from being used as a fortress for Irish attacks.</p>  
    <p>The castle has derived its name from an Irish word, Carraig &Oacute; gConaing, meaning &lsquo;The Rock of the O Conaings&rsquo; and was believed to be the pre-Norman lords of the area. Alternatively, the name was translated as 'Carrageen &Oacute; cochineal', which means 'the rock of U Cochineal'. Folklore legend states that the word cochineal, which is an Irish word for candle, formed the end of the name Carrigogunnell. Therefore, the Carrigogunnell Castle came to be known as the 'Rock of the Castle'. Moreover, the name of the castle also relates to a story of the death-dealing candle. It is believed that a candle was lit by a witch during night, which vanquished all who saw it. St. Patrick, one of the renowned Irish warriors, scaled the rock and destroyed the light. </p>  
    <p>Standing 50 feet high with 5 storeys and a spiral stair, this central tower had a great circular bastion with an adjoining house in the east. This house dates back to 16th century. Well structured with limestone, various old buildings including the staircase run along the western flank of the castle. This multi-sided enclosure with a strong wall has a lower court, which is rough and overgrown. At the north eastern angle is a hall, which has a gate sloping its way to the south. The entrance to this hall is a small portal to the west. From the gabled roof of this iconic castle, one can experience scintillating view of the Shannon estuary. </p>